Best Practices in Managing Healthy Cash Flow
Just as having a healthy lifestyle and regular physical checkups can help you prevent and detect health problems - such as heart disease - early, paying close attention to cash flow – your business’s life blood – can help you keep your business free of financial problems.
 
Here are some best practices in managing cash flow:
 
Monitor your cash flow closely. Pay close and regular attention to all the metrics mentioned earlier, in “Metrics to Measure.” All of these measurements should be things that you and/or your chief financial officer have access to fairly quickly and easily.
 
Make projections frequently. By closely monitoring key cash flow data or variables, you’ll be able to make better, more accurate, more up-to-date projections of future cash flow and you’ll be more likely to keep your business out of trouble financially.
 
Prepare a thorough, accurate cash flow forecast. When forecasting sales and expenses for a given period, keep in mind historical figures, such as customer payment histories, industry norm, averages and trends, plus current economic and business conditions. Project monthly cash inflows and outflows during the period. As you go through the budget period, compare and update your budget based on actual monthly performance.
 
Include your net cash position, which is:

Your cash on hand at the start of the period + estimated cash inflows – estimated cash outflows = net cash balance.
 
Identify issues early. Obviously, the sooner you identify a problem, the better, and the easier it could be to fix it. For one thing, if you need to approach your bank to request some lenience or flexibility, they’ll likely be more receptive to helping if you ask them far in advance.
 
Understand basic accounting. By knowing the key concepts of basic business accounting, you’ll be able to read and understand financial statements, and you’ll be more capable of monitoring the financial health of your business and making sure you stay cash flow positive.
 
Have an emergency backup plan. Who knows what might happen that could result in a worst-case scenario in which you are close to a cash flow crisis. A clear, well thought out back-up plan can provide you with peace of mind and a source of reserve cash in case you need it one day.
 
Grow carefully. Growing your business too quickly can be highly risky. As you ramp up to sell more, you first need to spend more, buy more raw materials or hire more staff. If the amount of time between your increased cash outlay and increased sales is too long, you could find your business starving for cash. So, take precautions when growing your business and identify financial risks and have a business growth plan in place that avoids long delays between cash outflow and inflow, and that pays very close attention to managing cash flow.
 
Invoice quickly. Any delays in invoicing your clients will only add to your wait to receive payment for your work. Small businesses should invoice clients as soon as the work has been completed.
 
Use technology wisely and effectively. Tools exist that can help you manage your cash flow quite easily and productively. These include software dedicated to small businesses, such as QuickBooks as well as cloud (Web-based) accounting services.


Cash flow is the money that is moving in and out of your business each month.

Can Two People Claim Head of Household at the Same Address?

Close
Key Takeaways
Cash flow is the way money moves in and out of a business from month to month.
Customer purchases and payments are cash going in, and business expenses are cash going out.
Managing cash flow is important especially for new businesses and seasonal business.
You can run a cash flow report to monitor the flow of cash into and out of your business.
How Cash Flow Works
Cash flow is the money that is moving (flowing) in and out of your business in a given period (such as a month).1

Cash in: Cash comes in from customers or clients who buy your products or services. If customers don't pay at the time of purchase, some of your cash flow is coming from collections of accounts receivable.
Cash out: Cash goes out of your business in the form of payments for expenses, such as money to vendors, rent for office space, monthly loan payments, taxes, and other accounts payable.
The best way to keep track of cash flow in your business is to run a cash flow report. This report shows the cash you received and the cash paid out to show your business's cash position at the end of every month. At times, you may need to keep track of cash flow on a weekly, or even daily, basis. 

A quick and easy way to perform a cash flow analysis is to compare your total unpaid purchases to the total sales due at the end of each month. If the total unpaid purchases are greater than the total sales due, you'll need to spend more cash than you receive in the next month, indicating a potential cash-flow problem.

Note
Your accounting software should have a cash flow statement as one of the standard reports, or your accountant can run it for you.

Example of Cash Flow
Cash flow is what happens to cash when a customer pays a bill, when your business buys supplies, or when you pay an employee or an independent contractor. Cash moves into your business when you receive a payment, and then out again when you pay expenses.

Cash vs. Real Cash
For some businesses, such as restaurants and some retailers, cash is really cash: currency and paper money. The business takes cash from customers and sometimes pays its bills in cash, too. Cash businesses have a special issue with keeping track of cash flow, especially since they may not track income unless there are invoices or other paperwork.

Think of cash flow as a picture of your business checking account over time. If more money is coming in than is going out, you are in a "positive cash flow" situation and you have enough to pay your bills. If more cash is going out than is coming in, you are in danger of being overdrawn, and you will need to find money to cover your overdrafts.

Note
Cash businesses are more at risk of being ​audited by the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) because it's easy to hide cash income and not report it.

Importance of Cash Flow
Lack of cash is one of the biggest reasons small businesses fail. It's also called "running out of money," and it will shut you down faster than anything else.

When Starting a Business
Dealing with cash flow issues is most difficult when you are starting a new business. You have many expenses, and money is going out fast. And you may have few or no sales or customers who are paying you. You will need some other sources of cash, such as a temporary line of credit, to get you going and create a positive cash flow.

The first six months of a business are a crucial time period for cash flow. If you don't have enough cash to carry you through this time, your chances for success aren't good. Suppliers often won't give credit to new businesses, and your customers may want to pay on credit, giving you a "cash crunch" to deal with.

Note
In estimating your cash flow needs for your startup, include your personal living expenses that will need to come out of the business. The less you need to take from your business for personal costs, the more you can devote to your business during the crucial startup time.

Seasonal Business
Cash flow is also particularly important for seasonal businesses—those that have a large fluctuation of business at different times of the year, such as holiday businesses and summer businesses. Managing cash flow in this type of business is tricky, but it can be done with diligence.

Cash vs. Profit
It's possible for your business to make a profit but have no cash. How can that happen? The short answer is that profit is an accounting concept, while cash, as noted above, is the amount in the business checking account. Profit doesn't pay the bills. You can have assets, such as accounts receivable (money owed to you by customers), but if you can't collect what's owed, you won't have cash.1

Requirements for Managing Cash Flow
There are steps you can take to better manage your cash flow and avoid a cash flow emergency.

Control Inventory
Having too much inventory ties up cash. Keep track of inventory so you can estimate your needs better. You may find it necessary to discount prices in the short term in order to move a lot of inventory, generate cash, and get back to a better level.

Collect Receivables
Set up a collections schedule, using an accounts receivable aging report as a guide. Follow up on non-payers so those payments don't fall through the cracks. Keeping up with accounts receivable will prevent a cash crunch.

End Unprofitable Relationships
Decide when it's time to end a relationship with someone who never pays. You can then use that time to focus on clients and customers who contribute to bottom line, not detract from it.

Note
If you have time to do only one business analysis every month, make it a cash flow statement to keep track of your cash position.

How To Get Cash Flow Help
Many businesses get help with temporary cash flow shortages by setting up a working capital line of credit. A business credit line for working capital works in a different way from a loan.

When you get a credit line, you have a certain amount of credit in an account that you can draw on when you are short of cash and pay back when you have extra cash.2 You owe interest charges only on the amount taken out.3 For example, if you have a $25,000 line of credit, and you have taken out $10,000, you would pay interest only on the $10,000. If you were to take out a loan instead, you'd have to repay the entire amount (with interest), even if you didn't need all of it.

Frequently Asked Questions (FAQs)
What is a cash flow statement?
A cash flow statement is a financial report that details the cash coming in and going out of a business. It contains three main parts: cash from operations (such as sales), cash from investing, and cash from financing (such as loans or lines of credit).

What is an example of cash flow?
Suppose you have a company that produces coffee mugs. Customer purchases of mugs would provide cash coming in to the business, while payroll would represent cash going out. Cash might also flow in as the result of any investments owned by the company, or cash might flow outward in the form of loan payments, taxes, or overhead costs. A cash flow statement would document the movement of these different types of cash.

Small business tips: 10 steps to cashflow heaven

1. Set cashflow targets

One way of controlling cashflow is by preparing and maintaining a cashflow forecast. Andrew Johnson, financial controller for telephone conferencing provider Powwownow, advises that this can be updated weekly, to provide an accurate outlook for the next six to 12 months.

He says: "Setting targets for the credit controllers is an excellent way to ensure it is given the attention necessary and provides a level of satisfaction and ownership to hit and beat these."

2. Agree clear payment terms

Establishing clear payment terms from the outset is important as Suzannah Nichol, chief executive of construction industry body the National Specialist Construction Council, explains.


"If you don't start off knowing what your payment terms are, it is difficult to know when you are going to get paid, " she says. "If you don't know when a payment is overdue, how are you going to manage your cashflow?"

For construction firms working on government projects, an Act of Parliament commits to payment within 30 days down to the third rung of the supply chain. But Nichol says businesses in other sectors would do well to insist on the same terms: "In our view it is also good business to pay within 30 days. Your employees need paying in 30 days and your suppliers also need paying in that time."

3. Invoice quickly

Some factors that influence cashflow are in a business's own hands, including when to invoice. Marion Thomson, of Embarc Ltd Accountants, advises SMEs to invoice clients as soon as the work is completed.

"If you wait two weeks after the work has been complete, then it should be fairly obvious that it will take a further two weeks before that cash arrives in your bank account," she says. "Issuing your invoice by email will mean it will get there immediately and you will have a record of it being sent."

4. Make payments easy for customers

Making payments should be made as easy as possible for your customer, Thomson advises. "Try to avoid being paid by cheque as it will result in delays before the money arrives in your bank account," she says. "Online payments are a much better option."

5. Offer clients fixed rate payment packages

One way that SMEs can ensure good cashflow is by offering periodic payment packages, a strategy which Yva Yorston of Boost Business Support has adopted for her clients. She says the hourly rate, which she has traditionally used for her virtual assistant business, offers no way of predicting her income from month to month.

"To overcome this, I have developed retainer packages for a fixed number of hours each month, which are billed in advance," she says. "This way, I get paid up front rather than in arrears, and I can plan my spending and business growth more easily. The peace of mind this gives me is priceless."


6. Establishing payment arrangement that minimises debtor days

Every business experiences a gap between invoicing and payment, but powwownow's Andrew Johnson suggests they can minimise these.

"One excellent way to ensure these remain stable is to establish direct debit as a business norm for collecting receipts. It allows a business to scale without increasing the costs required to collect the debt, while also providing a stable inflow of cash from which all payments can be made from."

Fitness instructor Tanya Pascal who runs an adventure bootcamp franchise in Surrey, says her business has seen a "massive turnaround" since moving to direct debit payments from upfront payments for blocks of sessions. "For my customers it's a no-brainer to go onto direct debit and it's a regular income for me," she says.

7. Use technology to manage cashflow

Technology can make it much easier to manage cashflow. Andy Harrold, of Aberdeen Gardening Services, said cloud-based accounting is the biggest time-saver for his business, allowing him to work more effectively, free up time, and keep a better track of his business cashflow.

He adds: "Not only has it given me flexibility on where I can view my accounts, but it has also removed the worrying hassle of backing up all that data. I can now view my accounts on the move via my laptop, tablet or mobile phone and keep up to date with my financial situation."

Accounting software can also help entrepreneurs with limited time for administration such as Ali Hardy, who runs design consultancy Studio Husky in his spare time. "The convenience of having reliable accounting software and advice available 24/7 is a real key," he says.

8. Do not focus on profit, focus on cashflow

Agnes Cserhati of AC Powercoaching estimates that 90% of the SMEs she works with do not have a cashflow plan from day one, despite having forecasts of profit margins for years ahead. She says this is a common reason for early business failure.

"If your cashflow is in order, your profit will be in order," she says. "A lot of businesses do not make it past six months. They might have been a profitable business eventually, but they need to have good cashflow to survive."

She also encourages young businesses to work with reliable, quick-paying clients initially, even if it means smaller clients and slimmer profits margins.

"You need to look at your payment terms," she says. "Don't be blinded by profit margins."

9. Train an employee to monitor your cashflow

Some small businesses, like Manchester-based Ratio Law LLP, allocate a dedicated person to track the money going in and out.


Joanna Norris, partner at Ratio Law LLP says: "As a small law firm, we have to be particularly clever with our cashflow, as we have a lot of regular and substantial outgoings and our income stream can be unpredictable.

"To counter this we've trained our office manager to keep an extremely close eye on our daily credits and debits to ensure there is always sufficient cash in the bank. At the end of the day, cash really is king."

10. Keep the bank informed

Banks can offer businesses useful services like overdrafts or credit, particularly when they are starting out.

Andrew Selmes of Hire or Buy Art, a business that launched earlier this year, says that keeping the bank informed over any unforeseen outgoings and changes in forecasts, has been crucial.

"If we see anything unexpected, we go away and let the bank know so there are no shocks. My partner is on first name terms with our banker and gives them the same respect as we would give to our clients. We speak to our contact at the bank every four to six weeks and we are incredibly frugal about what we spend our money on – our bank appreciates that."


Understand the Importance of Cash Flow and Monitor It
Do you know the status of your business’s cash flow right now? What about six months from now? How confident are you that your business would be able to ride out any dry periods where cash outflow exceeds incoming cash? To stay clear of any cash flow problems, first appreciate how important cash flow is. Then understand the basics of cash flow management and accounting so that it’s easier for you to keep tabs on your firm’s financial health. And finally, have systems in place that ensure that you and/or other key financial personnel monitor your cash flow regularly.
 
Value it. Research shows that poor cash flow is the reason behind about 80% of small business failures. According to the U.S. Bureau of Labor, and as discussed in this Inc.com cash flow article, two-thirds of small businesses survive two years, only 44% make it through four years, and just 31% last seven years. With sufficient cash flow, you can greatly increase the odds of your business surviving and thriving. The first step is to recognize and appreciate how essential positive cash flow is to your business. It is one of the most important things you can do as a new business owner.
 
Understand it. Learn the basics of monitoring cash flow. Every business owner could probably benefit from a basic accounting course. Learn what the most important measurements are to apply to your business’s financial health, even if you have designated experts on staff. Delegation is important and necessary, but the buck ultimately stops with you. Being able to understand financial concepts and the language of accounting better enables you to evaluate the financial health of your business.
 
Monitor your cash flow. Armed with good intentions and basic knowledge, you can now monitor your business’s cash flow. Look at your current financial situation, but also pay attention to patterns, such as how long certain clients take to pay their bills. If problems arise, it can be critically important for you to be able to pinpoint the causes early so that you can act on them effectively.

Cash Flow Basics

What is cash flow? It’s basically the movement of funds in and out of your business. You should be tracking this either weekly, monthly or quarterly. There are essentially two kinds of cash flows:

• Positive cash flow: This occurs when the cash funneling into your business from sales, accounts receivable, etc. is more than the amount of the cash leaving your businesses through accounts payable, monthly expenses, salaries, etc.


• Negative cash flow: This occurs when your outflow of cash is greater than your incoming cash. This generally spells trouble for a business, but there are steps you can take to remedy the situation and generate or collect more cash while maintaining or cutting expenses.

Achieving a positive cash flow does not come by chance. You have to work at it. You need to analyze and manage your cash flow to more effectively control the inflow and outflow of cash. The SBA recommends undertaking cash flow analysis to make sure you have enough cash each month to cover your obligations in the coming month. The SBA has a free cash flow worksheet you can use. In addition, most accounting software packages geared to small or mid-sized businesses – such as Quickbooks will help you produce a cash flow statement. There are also other websites offering free templates, including Winsmark Business Solutions and Office Depot.

Profit versus Cash Flow

Profit does not equal cash flow. You can’t just look at your profit and loss statement (P&L) and get a grip on your cash flow. Many other financial figures feed into factoring your cash flow, including accounts receivable, inventory, accounts payable, capital expenditures, and debt service. Smart cash-flow management requires a laser focus on each of these drivers of cash, in addition to your profit or loss. “There is a secret that very few business owners have discovered (and the accounting community has not done a good job revealing): knowing whether you earned a profit (or created a loss) is not the same as knowing what happened to your cash,” Campbell says. “Profit, as defined by the rules of accounting, is simply revenue minus expenses. Invoicing a customer for products or services you sold to them creates revenue. Actually collecting the money on that invoice is what creates cash.”

A positive cash flow is actually needed to generate profits. You need enough cash to pay your employees and suppliers so that you can make goods. It’s the sale of those goods that helps generate a profit. But if you don’t have the money to make the goods, you don’t end up with the profit. So you really need to structure your business to have a positive cash flow if you want your business to grow and increase profits.

“Growing your business puts a huge strain on cash,” Campbell says. “You almost always have to make investments and bring certain expenses on ahead of achieving the higher revenue and cash flow that comes with successful growth. Maybe you want to open an office in a new city so you can build the business there. Or, you need to build a new facility so you have the capacity to sell to larger customers. Those scenarios (and others) require cash up front.”

How to Improve Cash Flow

Most business owners see growth as the solution to a cash-flow problem. That’s why they often achieve their goal of growing the business only to find they have increased their cash-flow problems in the process. Plan for growth and the related cash outlays in advance, so they do not come as a surprise. In the meantime, the SBA recommends that you take the following practical steps to better manage cash flow, especially for the growing business:

• Collecting receivables – To speed up the receipt and processing of receivables, the SBA suggests several steps. Spring for a lockbox service, post office boxes serviced by banks so that customers in far flung locations can mail payments there and the checks will be processed by the banks more quickly. Ask customers to preauthorize checks so that banks can draw against their accounts at timed intervals. Centralize your banking at one bank. Ask customers to pay with depository transfer checks, a relatively cheap fund transfer. You can also try offering discounts to customers if they pay bills quickly.

• Tightening credit requirements – Businesses often have to extend credit to customers, particularly when starting out or growing. But you have to do your research beforehand to determine the risk of extending credit to each customer. Can they pay their bills on time? Is their business growing or faltering? Are they having cash-flow problems? The SBA recommends getting a Dun & Bradstreet report on potential customers and asking them to fill out a credit application. You should also check references. Another option to extending store credit is to accept credit cards. This will cost you a percentage, generally from 2 to 5 percent of the sale, but it may be a safer bet for getting paid on time.

• Increasing sales – If you need more cash, it seems like a no brainer to go out and try to attract new customers or sell additional goods or services to your existing customers. But this may be easier said than done. New customer acquisition is essential to a growing business, but it can take time and money to convert prospects into sales. Selling more to existing customers is cheaper and you may be able to do this by analyzing what they’re buying and why – information that may even lead you to increase your profit margin and, hopefully, generate more cash. But the SBA warns businesses to be careful when increasing sales because you may just increase your accounts receivables and not actual cash if these sales are on credit.

• Pricing discounts – One option to increasing cash flow is to offer your customers discounts if they pay early. While this practice may impact your profit margin, it may help your management of cash flow by incentivizing customers to make payments earlier than billing cycles typically require. Your company may also take advantage of this with suppliers and others that you owe, but be careful that your early payments of debt don’t leave you with a cash flow shortfall.

• Securing loans – Short-term cash flow problems may sometimes necessitate a business taking out a loan from a financial institution. Some possible types are revolving credit lines or equity loans, according to the SBA. Most of the time this type of borrowing accomplishes its goals, although during the financial crisis many banks were canceling credit lines and calling in loans. Another option is a long-term amortized loan which includes interest and principal until the loan is paid off.

Getting Control of Your Cash Flow

Campbell suggests asking yourself the following two questions to get a sense about whether you have your business’ cash flow situation under control:

1. What is my cash balance right now?

2. What do I expect my cash balance to be six months from now?

“If you can’t answer these two questions, then strap yourself in for a wild ride,” he says. “You are on a roller coaster ride that’s about to become really frightening. You don’t have your cash flow under control.”

One way to keep that situation under control is by tracking your cash flow results every month to determine if your management is creating the type of cash flow your business needs. This also helps you get better and better at creating cash flow projections you can rely on as you make business decisions about expanding your business and taking care of your existing bills.

Metrics to Monitor
While every small business owner has their own set of goals for the success of their business, they usually start with wanting to make a profit. And while generating a profit is ultimately what it’s all about, your business will need to stay afloat through the rough times before you can enjoy the rewards of success. Keeping a close eye on your cash flow can help keep your business out of financial trouble. It involves more than just looking at your business’s bank account and your profit and loss statement. As the business owner, there are a number of important items you can monitor regularly to keep a pulse on your company's cash flow health. Review them closely each month, or even weekly if you can. This way, you are more likely to spot problems early and have the time you need to resolve them before they become major issues.
 
Some key metrics you should regularly monitor include:
 
Bank balances. Cash in the bank is important, but it is just one of numerous components to consider when looking at the full flow of cash: from paying for raw items, to producing them, to hiring staff to sell them, to invoicing, to collecting on those invoices. Regularly monitor and understand the transactions that comprise your bank balances.
 
Sales. Sales is only the beginning of the process of generating cash flow, but obviously without it, you won’t have any cash to receive. If your cash flow is in good shape, you won’t need to focus on it as much, and you’ll be able to spend more time generating sales income.
 
Receivables. Ideally, you should keep your accounts receivable down to the lowest level possible. One goal is to have next to no receivables beyond 30 days of billing. Encourage clients to pay quickly. Almost as important is to know with relative certainty or reliability when you can expect to be paid by each client.
 
Inventories. Keep only enough – and no excess – inventory on hand. This could require very close monitoring to establish reliable or repeatable and somewhat predictable sales patterns to help you keep inventory at a realistic level.
 
Payables. Pay close attention to what you owe. If you pay your bills sooner than you need to, you might risk leaving your business short of cash. However, paying too late could result in penalties and possibly hurt your relationship with vendors.
 
Credit terms. Limit the amount of time you allow your customers to pay for the goods and services you sell them. Be cautious about extending credit without thoroughly checking a new customer’s credit history.

Surviving Cash Shortfalls
Despite our best intentions and best-laid plans, there are times when a small business can run into a cash crunch. When that happens, the key is to act quickly and decisively so that you can turn around the situation and avoid any potential financial calamity. These are a few tips that can help you survive a cash shortfall.
 
Tighten credit. Be cautious when providing credit. Run a credit check on new customers and consider requesting references. Get a Dun & Bradstreet report on them and have them fill out a credit application. Check references. Consider accepting credit cards.
 
Encourage early payments. Offer clients a discount if they pay in full within a limited time. A 2% discount, for example, could be a small sacrifice to get access to urgently needed cash.
Delay or stretch your payments. If cash is truly tight, wait as long as possible before your business makes its payments.
 
Factor in some help if needed. Use a factoring service if you’re having problems collecting on your receivables. You’ll have to pay a substantial fee – possibly 15% of what is collected – but you’ll be relieved of any further frustrations associated with collecting on overdue accounts, and you’ll at least have 85% of your billed amount in hand. Find more information on factoring here.
 
Conserve cash. Look critically at purchases, especially large ones. Consider making installment payments if you need to.
 
Talk with your vendors. If you’re in a temporary bind, explain that to your vendors. They might give you more leeway in making payments until your situation improves. If you have strong relationships with long-time vendors, they might be more inclined to give you a break, and that could also be in their long-term best interest.
 
Limit your inventory. Inventory that sits idly could be like atherosclerosis, a disease that slowly blocks arteries.  Cash flow will keep your business running smoothly. Too much inventory, on the other hand, could, in extreme cases, lead to premature death. Monitor and limit your inventory. Keeping a close watch on daily sales activity can yield valuable information that could help you more accurately predict future sales and regulate inventory.
 
Identify problems early and act quickly. The earlier you can nip a problem in the bud and resolve it, the easier and less costly it will be. That’s the reasoning behind so many best-practice tips: to be proactive, effective and efficient in your cash flow management.

Technology to Help Manage Cash
To help you manage your business’s cash flow most effectively, use the latest and most appropriate small business accounting software. The most popular one, QuickBooks, is available as downloadable software or as an online tool with an annual contract and monthly payments. There are several versions. You can decide which is appropriate for your business’s needs.
 
Quickbooks is also not the only choice, though it is highly rated and among the most popular when it comes to small business accounting software. Other options include Sage 50 (formerly Peachtree), AccountEdge, and CYMA. You can find reviews here.
 
Do your homework and read about the features that various products have. Get a sense of what is most appropriate for your situation and your needs – today as well as perhaps a few years from now, if you envision your needs evolving.
 
Whatever you choose as accounting software, it will take some time to learn the ropes, but once you do, expect to have a much easier time tracking your cash flow and handling other small business accounting responsibilities.
 
When it comes to managing cash, easy access to accurate and up-to-date information will provide enormous benefit in helping you monitor cash inflows and outflows. It will help you target when to expect receivables and when to handle your payables. Web-based cloud accounting is becoming easier to use and more popular.
 
In addition, consider Software as a Service (SaaS) applications, which are free initially and less costly in monthly fees than traditional accounting software.

What is Cash Flow Management?
Cash flow management is tracking and controlling how much money comes in and out of a business in order to accurately forecast cash flow needs. It’s the day-to-day process of monitoring, analyzing, and optimizing the net amount of cash receipts—minus the expenses. It’s all about managing your business finances responsibly, so there’s enough cash to grow.

Effective cash management strategies help to predict how much money will be available to cover things like debt, payroll, and vendor invoices.

Cash Flow Categories
Cash can flow from and through several parts of an organization, such as:

Cash Flows from Operations (CFO)
Operating cash flow describes money flows from ordinary operations, like production and the sale of goods. This is the figure that determines whether or not a company has enough funds coming in to pay bills and operating expenses. There must be more operating cash inflows (CFO) than outflows to have long-term viability. 

Cash Flows from Investing (CFI)
Investing cash flow (CFI) is a figure that represents how much cash has been generated or spent from investment-related activities in a specific time period.

Cash Flows from Financing (CFF)
Financing cash flow (CFF) demonstrates the net flows of cash that are used to fund the business and its working capital. Activities can include transactions that involve issuing debt or equity and paying dividends. CFF provides investors with insight into an organization’s cash position and how well the capital structure is managed.

The Relationship Between AP and Cash Flow Management
Accounts payable is a central component of managing cash flow because it represents money a company owes vendors. Once the payment of a liability is due, managing the timing of those payments is what helps a business maintain a healthy cash flow.

For example, if a company is experiencing a cash flow shortage, they may choose to delay accounts payables in order to conserve cash. However, this move can also damage supplier relationships and affect credit ratings. It will even result in late fees and interest charges.

On the other hand, paying AP too quickly may have a negative impact on your cash flow. That’s because you’re reducing the amount of cash on hand for business needs. This is why managing AP is so important for cash flow management.

Effective cash management techniques mean striking a balance between paying on time and delaying transactions to maintain healthy cash reserves. A company can use a variety of strategies to balance cash flow, like negotiating new payment terms or implementing an electronic invoicing system. You can even use AP automation for cash flow forecasting and managing payment cycles.

AP Automation as a Tool for Cash Flow Management
Accounts payable automation is a powerful tool for improving cash flow management. It involves the use of technology to streamline the entire AP process, from invoice to approval. AP automation can benefit your cash flow in the following ways:

Faster Invoice Processing: Invoices move quicker, reducing the time it takes suppliers to get paid. This helps a business maintain healthy relationships and avoid late fees or penalties.
Improved Control and Visibility: Provide real-time visibility into the status of invoices and payments, allowing companies to monitor their cash flow and make more informed decisions about paying bills.
Reduced Mistakes and Fraud: AP automation reduces fraud and errors by eliminating manual tasks and providing greater visibility into the entire AP process. This helps a company avoid costly mistakes and prevents fraud from impacting cash flow.
Cash Savings: Businesses reduce the costs associated with manual processes, like printing, data entry, postage, and storage. This frees up cash for other business needs to drive growth.
AP automation like Tipalti leads to better cash flow forecasting because companies can use the data and analytics to predict future cash flow more accurately. This helps to foresee expenses and thus, make better decisions.

An AP Automation and Cash Flow Management Example
Tipalti helped Vivino centralize its multi-subsidiary AP operations and gain visibility into future cash flow.

For Vivino, Tipalti gives them a better interface to see where global cash is flowing each week and provides the full picture required for strategic planning in each of their entities.

How do you get cash to go with the flow?
It starts by managing all of your spend in a single, finance automation solution.

Read More
Examples of Cash Flow Management
Example A – Short Cash
A small business has 90 days of inventory, but receivables are due in 60 days. However, the payable terms are 30 days. Cash flow projections are poor as funds are blocked with debtors and inventory, while the payables are due in a shorter time span.

To manage the cash flow efficiently, the company needs to either renegotiate payment terms with creditors, or speed up the realization of inventory and debtors. If they cannot do these things, there will be a deficit. Business owners will have to take out a business loan to reach a true cash balance.

Example B – Extra Cash
A manufacturing company has a policy to pay off creditors in 60 days, and extends a 30-day line of credit to customers. Additionally, they do not hold inventory for more than 10 days. This leaves extra cash on the table since payments are not made for 60 days, but realization of debt and inventory only takes 40 days.

In order to optimize the business’s cash flow, the company should look for opportunities to invest and grow.

Common Cash Flow Management Issues
When it comes to cash flow challenges, there are some key issues every business must face. Here are a few of them:

Cycling Industries
If you have a business in a highly cyclical industry, you can be prone to cash flow problems. This is seen a lot in real estate where the market can change at the drop of a dime. 

For example, property development requires a large amount of initial capital, as well as ongoing streams of cash flow. Unless some of the development is sold early, there will be cash flow issues, particularly if the market softens during construction. 

Variable Patterns of Revenue
If a business is seasonal, a company’s cash flow can deteriorate during the off-season. Performing a spend analysis and projecting fixed expenses is one way to keep a consistent flow of cash, year-round. This is the repetitive process of grouping procurement data, vendors, and purchases by cost to find opportunities for expense reduction and operational improvement. 

Rapid Expansion
Any company experiencing rapid growth can run into cash flow problems. Business growth typically involves higher labor costs, additional space, more capital investment for equipment, and so on. Maintaining increasing levels of inventory can also eat into your cash flow. If a business doesn’t plan properly, its growth can kill its cash. 

Lack of Accounts Receivable System
One of the most common cash flow problems a small business will see is the lack of an organized accounts receivable system. So many entrepreneurs are eager to obtain new customers that they forget about collecting invoices.

Extending Credit
Extending credit is another way a company can run into negative cash flow. Invoicing is typically done in 30 to 60-day windows. It’s not unusual for customers to delay payment to pad their own cash flows. This can leave a business in a financial crunch.

Projecting Expenses
A large struggle many small business owners face is learning how to properly project expenses and calculate future debts. A company must look at both short-term and long-term needs for effective cash flow forecasting. Cash flow and sales projection reports can show whether a business has enough money to cover operating expenses based on forecasted revenue. 

Winning Cash Flow Management Techniques 
As a business owner, you should always be looking to improve the cash flow management process. Some tasks are simple, while others may require extensive planning. To alleviate cash flow problems, here are a few tips for strategy:

Cash Flow Analysis
Perform a cash flow analysis on a consistent basis.

This starts with examining current cash flow statements, then asking a series of “what-ifs”, such as a large client moving on or unexpected expenses. By analyzing as many scenarios as possible, an organization can identify and spotlight the highest areas of risk in operations.

There are a variety of accounting software programs and apps with built-in reporting, that makes cash flow analysis a tad easier. 

Delay Outflows
Cash flow management is about developing strategies to keep an adequate flow for your business. One of the most common moves is to shorten the cash flow conversion period, so you bring in money faster. 

Cut Expenses
Bookkeepers should run a fine-tooth comb through expenses whenever possible. To leverage cash flow, put off spending unnecessary money. Hide the business credit card! All of this should be done while avoiding any late payment fees or penalties. 

A business should also examine capital expenditures. For example, repairing equipment instead of replacing it can ease outflow pressure.

Finance Large Orders
Rather than paying for large purchases outright, a business can also rely on a line of credit. Financing large orders through lenders, especially with a low-interest rate, can help leverage cash flow. 

This also helps to slim down inventories without interfering with business needs. It’s a smarter means of financial management. 

Keep Inflows Predictable
For optimal cash management, cash inflows must be timely and predictable. Invoice and collect as soon as possible. 

Offering early payment discounts and incentives to customers is one way of upping your cash flow game. You bring money in the door quicker when you reward people financially. Even 2% is enough incentive for clients to pay their bills sooner.

Accounts receivable and accounts payable must also follow up swiftly on late payments and reassess any underperforming contracts.

Escrow Services
For additional security, many companies will turn to escrow services. In this manner, a business can ensure payments aren’t delayed, especially with expensive or time-consuming projects. It’s especially prevalent with businesses that conduct shows, events, or gatherings that can be canceled at the last minute. 

Have a Backup Plan
You never know what could happen that might result in a “worst-case” scenario. Always be prepared for a cash flow crisis with a concise plan that will provide you peace of mind. This should include a place for reserve cash.

Grow Carefully
Growing too quickly is risky to cash flow and can cause shortfalls. As you ramp up to sell more, you first need to spend more. If the time between your increased cash outlay and increased sales is too long, there could be issues with future cash flow.

Use Technology
There are tools and templates available to make everyone’s job easier. This includes software dedicated to small businesses, like QuickBooks, as well as remote, cloud-based services.

Importance of Cash Flow Management
Cash management is critical for a company’s success. If the business constantly spends more than it earns, there are going to be issues with cash flow. Especially for a small business or startup. It’s your livelihood.

Investor Trust
At a basic level, a company’s ability to create value for investors is determined by its ability to maximize long-term free cash flow (FCF) and generate positive cash flows. Free cash flow is the cash a business generates from normal operations after subtracting money spent on capital expenditures (CapEx). 

Staying in Business
For a small business, avoiding extended cash shortages (large gaps between cash inflows and cash outflows) is important. The longer you go without positive cash flow, the harder it will be to stay in business for an extended period of time. 

Utilization of Funds
Proper cash flow management means no stone is left unturned. A company should always ensure the sufficiency of cash and make sure there is no underutilization of funds. There must be a balance between profitability and liquidity. No amount of money will replace astute planning.

Additional benefits for strategizing cash flow management:

Facilitate investments and keeps people interested
Help to plan for capital expenditure and profit margins
Take advantage of more opportunities with idle cash
Prepare the business for unexpected outflows
Allow adequate availability of cash for business purposes
Cashing In
All of this boils down to one fact: cash control is essential for business success. 

One of the main reasons small businesses fail is poor cash flow management. It doesn’t matter how many sales you have in a quarter if none of that money is coming through the door. 

Focus on total cash control, which is internal control of cash, cash-related policies, and cash flow management.

Business growth requires strong corporate governance and segregation of duties. Instill a policy with authorized approvals, signature authority with limits, and bank account reconciliation. 
 

When setting up a new cash forecasting model, time horizons should be chosen intentionally. There are short, medium, and long-range forecasts covering 0 to three months, three months to one year, and several years, respectively.

The period length you pick determines what information you can uncover from your financial model — whether that’s daily payments, weekly cash receipts, or quarterly sales trends. For medium-term cash planning and decision-making, many businesses use 13-week cash flow forecasting.

Uses of a 13-week Cash Flow Model
13-week forecasts are ideal for gauging a company’s financial health and future cash flows — whether you’re a CFO or an investor.

Corporate senior management — including the CFO — typically uses 13-week models in quarterly planning and strategy sessions. Leadership also uses these models to identify potential liquidity shortfalls — especially if the company is in financial distress.

Outside of the company, investors use 13-week cash forecasts to evaluate the overall health of businesses. These financial statements are also often a requirement for reporting to banks and lenders.

Advantages of a 13-week Cash Flow Forecast
Provides Reliable Insights
The accuracy of a forecast often decreases the further it extends into the future because business environments are constantly changing.

The 13-week forecasting model is just short enough to be reliable because it lets you use historical data to estimate cash flow in the near term. But unlike short-term models — think weekly forecasting — the 13-week framework still provides a long-term view.

Aids Medium-Term Planning Without Affecting Long-Term Planning
With the 13-week cash flow model, there is barely any friction between current and future plans.

Thirteen weeks of visibility allow leaders to make medium-term cash management plans — including debt drawdowns, loan repayments, and investments. But a 13-week forecasting model won’t interrupt long-term plans like setting up new plants and capital expenditure budgeting.

Shows Granular Details
A 13-week cash flow forecasting process typically shows weekly reporting periods, not just the multi-week view. This perspective helps internal and external leaders discuss, analyse, and improve medium-term cash planning while viewing the model.

Enables Medium-Term Liquidity Risk Forecasting
A 13-week cash flow model provides weekly liquidity visibility, so it’s accurate enough for leadership to identify medium-term liquidity risks. Thirteen weeks also offer ample time to take action and resolve those issues.

Say you identify a potential liquidity shortfall with 10 weeks’ notice. The treasury team can spend three weeks arranging bank funding or reviewing intercompany lending options.

Informs Quarterly Planning
Senior management will always want cash balance reports on their own key reporting dates — monthly, quarterly, or yearly. A weekly rolling 13-week cash flow forecast covers a full quarter and provides cash visibility on the next key reporting date or by quarter-end.

Facilitates Bank and Investor Reporting
Banks and investors will only put their money in a company that can show creditworthiness and good financial control. A 13-week cash forecast provides clear visibility of a company’s working capital, so banks and investors can use the model to evaluate businesses.

When is a 13-Week Cash Flow Forecast Not Suitable?
Short-Term Liquidity Planning
If business objectives focus on short-term liquidity planning, a short forecast horizon is better than a 13-week cash flow. For example, a 10- or 15-business-day model is better suited for a company looking to quickly settle debts.

A short-term forecast could have daily or weekly cash flow reporting periods. This granularity lets you report on high-level flows and cash positions with a higher degree of accuracy and at a more precise date in the very near term.

Long-Term Liquidity Risk Management
Medium-term liquidity issues can be identified and actioned with a 13-week forecast horizon. But a six-month forecast horizon (done on a weekly basis for 13 weeks and then monthly for the following three months) will be better at flagging up long-term liquidity risk issues — like whether or not you have enough cash to fuel expansion initiatives.

How to Choose the Right Time Horizon
Select a time horizon that meets forecast objectives and aligns with your business model.

Use a short time horizon if your business needs to manage lines of credit, high interest rates, and heavy liability. This period length will give you day-to-day liquidity visibility, so you can plan your spending accordingly.

If you run a company with steady cash inflows and a high valuation, a short-term model will not be as essential. But generally, this financial model shows the real-time financial health of your company, so you can quickly spot any arising shortfalls.

During a financial crisis like a war or pandemic, you should consider a combination of short- and long-term forecast models. For example, you could combine a 13-week cash flow with a five-year cash flow plan and one-year plan to create a rolling budget and prepare for multiple scenarios — best case, worst case, and expected case.

The different models will reflect varying outcomes based on how far in the future each forecast goes. These figures can then be used for more accurate cash planning.

Whatever time frame or combination you pick, use specialised cash flow forecasting software for your company's cash and liquidity forecasts. The software will:

Improve forecast accuracy and quality.
Reduce the administrative burden of forecasts.
Allow time for analysis.
With CashAnalytics, for instance, you can set up a rolling 13-week cash flow model and look at your weekly forecasts at the touch of a button. You'll be able to quickly conduct variance analysis between forecast figures and actual cash, identify biases, and make corrections as necessary.

The Key Cash Flow Metrics All Large Companies Should Track

This period of protracted uncertainty has required the vast majority of large companies across the globe to redouble their focus on cash and liquidity.

Corporate treasury and finance teams will have quickly adapted their cash reporting processes to reflect the urgency of this unlikely situation. As such, many of them will now be providing senior management with daily reports on key cash flow metrics.

Indeed, this practice is almost certain to outlive the economic upheaval precipitated by the outbreak of COVID-19. Cash flow reporting, as part of a larger liquidity risk management governance framework, is likely to remain under the microscope for the foreseeable future.

At CashAnalytics, we’ve recently assisted several of our global clients in adding greater depth and granularity to their daily and weekly cash reporting so they can consistently monitor critical indicators, such as company-wide liquidity, with the requisite visibility.

This level of enhanced granularity also allows businesses to perform pivotal actual versus forecast analysis because all cash and liquidity metrics should be monitored on both an actual and forecast basis. If a metric is important today, it will be important in the future.

And while no two large companies are identical, there are certain cash flow and liquidity metrics that simply cannot be overlooked.

Cash Flow KPIs
Metric 1: Total Available Liquidity
This is an obvious one, however, it also happens to be the ultimate bottom line. Every action now taken in a company should make the best use of available liquidity to safeguard the business in the long-term.

Liquidity is a combination of cash on hand within the business - held in bank accounts or highly liquid cash investments - and external credit facilities that can be drawn down on short notice.

In large companies, the process of calculating both current and forecast liquidity can be difficult due to the number of moving parts. It is an essential metric, though, and every effort should be made to track it very closely.

‍

Metric 2: Daily and Weekly Aged Debtor Analysis
Most debtor analysis is carried out on a 30, 60, or 90-day basis. To effectively manage liquidity and cash in the near-term, debtors need to be analyzed and forecast to at least a weekly, if not daily, level of granularity.

The unwind of the debtor book is the primary source of cash flow into a business. During times of stress, staying close to how the debtor’s book behaves, particularly the payment patterns of key customers, will allow greater efficiency in short-term cash and liquidity management.

Moreover, it also makes mid and long-term planning easier as this behavior can be factored into future assumptions.

‍

Metric 3: 30-Day and 13-Week Operating Cash Burn
When operating cash flow assumptions have been updated to reflect changing variables, short to medium-term operating cash burn, in the form of 30-day and 13-week analysis, needs to be diligently tracked.

Cash burn of any kind must be rigorously surveyed but analyzing cash burn versus historic trends will highlight whether the burn is merely seasonal or if a new trend is emerging.

‍

Metric 4: Weeks of Liquidity on Hand
This is a measure of the availability of relative liquidity. It shows how long the cash or liquidity on hand can support the business through a period of stress or excessive cash burn.

The weeks of liquidity on hand is a key measurement of financial risk and should be continuously analyzed under different scenarios to essentially calculate the liquidity runway of the business in weeks as underlying economic and business conditions change.

‍

The Necessity of Scenario Analysis
While the liquidity and cash flow metrics above provide key insights into the financial health of the business, it is also crucial, especially amid such volatility, to frequently interrogate them under changing assumptions and various scenarios.

Setting Up A Cash Flow Forecasting Process

For a head office treasury or finance team, setting up new cash flow forecasting process or refreshing an existing process can bring many benefits. Being able to accurately forecast a company’s future cash position reduces risk of future liquidity issues and minimises the opportunity cost of holding uninvested cash. Also, having fast access to reliable cash flow data allows the treasury and finance team to consistently contribute to the strategic decisions being made within their organisation.

However, designing and rolling out any new reporting process in a large organisation can be challenging. Especially if adequate preparation is not done in advance. Dealing with multiple peoples in multiple places using multiple systems might seem like a daunting task, but taking a structured approach to the design and roll-out of a new process, as well as carefully managing the communication with all stakeholders, will enable a smooth roll-out and ongoing operation.

‍

1. Setting Business Objectives
The business objectives are the reason the new cash forecasting process is being put in place. Cash forecasting supports a range of high value business activities, and the business case for putting a process in place can have a number of dimensions.

The headline activities supported by cash forecasting often include:

ActivityDescriptionWorking Capital ManagementEnsuring the short-term cash and working capital needs of the business are adequately planned and provisioned for.Debt and Interest ReductionGaining the required forecast visibility to confidently and safely use excess cash to reduce debt levels and interest costs.Covenant and Key Date VisibilityBeing able to accurately project expected cash levels on key reporting dates, thereby understanding the impact on covenant levels.Liquidity Risk ManagementCash forecasting may not instigate a direct action but, in many cases, it is used simply as an early warning signal of future problems.

‍

2. Designing a forecasting model
The design of the forecasting model itself is a critical task. At a basic level, the forecast model outlines the level of reporting detail required and the forecast time horizon.

Often the level of reporting detail in a cash forecast mirrors the level of detail in management reporting packs. This, at the very least, is a useful starting point.

It’s always a good idea to start with the simplest model first. One that provides the base level of required information. This can then be scaled to a more detailed or complex model over time.

‍

3. Scoping and Planning
Once the business objectives have been set and the forecast model designed, the next step is to scope the project and set a plan.

This planning process won’t be much different to planning for any other project, but it remains an important consideration. A planning document should identify:

Required timelines and other events that may impact the delivery of the project (e.g. year-end closing)
Key stakeholders and their availability.
Other dependent systems and data sources.
Setting the project team and assigning responsibilities.
‍

4. Process Set-up
The process set-up is a practical step that brings the requirements outlined in the design, scoping and planning stages to life. Whether using a manual tool such as excel or a dedicated cash flow forecasting software solution designed to automate the manual parts of the process, the three steps outlined below will need to be covered.

Step 1: Tool Configuration

Configure the chosen tool so that it mirrors the required reporting structure and maps to the correct master file data (business unit names, etc.)

Step 2: Map to Data Sources

Mapping to other data sources such as ERP systems is a key automation step than needs to be considered, but is often left until after the base reporting process is in place.

Step 3: Testing

The testing phase ensures that the implemented structures produce the required reporting output, and that the data interfaces are working correctly.

‍

5. Communication and roll-out
Clear communication to all stakeholders will be required throughout the project. However, communication is particularly important in and around the time the process is ready to be rolled out to the wider organisation.

It is a factor that is sometimes overlooked but clear and consistent communication with stakeholders, particularly those people contributing forecast information, is key success factor in both the initial roll-out and ongoing operation of the forecasting process.

During the roll-out part of the project, training will need to be provided to everyone involved. This typically takes the form of webinars supported by training documentation. On an ongoing basis, dialogue and communication will centre on feedback, business analysis and the continuous improvement of forecast quality.



Payment terms regulate the payment that customers must make to a company for a delivery or service. Companies have a great deal of freedom in the design of their payment terms. However, it makes sense to stick to common formulations in order to avoid misunderstandings. We will show you here what this can look like with the help of a few examples.

Payment terms on an invoice in the UK - What are they and why are they important?
In the payment terms, a company specifies which conditions apply to its customers when paying their invoices. For example, when customers place an order in an online shop, they accept the seller's payment terms. If they do not, no business contract is concluded.

Nouveau call-to-action
Payment terms apply wherever money is exchanged for goods or services. Payment can be made in various ways, e.g. by advance payment, payment on receipt of goods, or payment on account after receipt of goods.

The payment terms in the form of payment deadlines or payment periods are stated on the invoice, indicating the latest date by which the invoice must be paid. It may also indicate that a discount may be deducted for early payment.

New call-to-action
What are normal payment terms?
Companies in the UK often choose the standard payment term of 30 days for their payment terms on invoices. This corresponds to the legal payment term. However, any other payment term can be chosen.

However, it must be ensured that customers can also meet these deadlines. Less than 7 working days is therefore unusual.

What are the best payment terms?
It is in a company's interest to be paid as early as possible. This means that up-front payment is best. Customers then pay the full amount or a partial amount before the company provides the service or delivery.

However, up-front payment is not always possible or can lead to customers choosing another company where they can pay on account. To avoid this, a compromise can be made: Offering discounts for earlier payment.

Customers receive an invoice upon delivery, which is payable in 30 days, for example. However, if they pay within 7 days, they can deduct a certain percentage (discount rate) from the invoice amount. This reduces the company's profit, but ensures a faster cash flow.

Payment terms: Examples
To illustrate the payment terms, we present some common situations from practice.

Upfront payment terms
If a company wants to be paid in advance for its service or delivery, this must be communicated to the customer when the sales contract is concluded. The amount to be paid in advance can be the full invoice amount or only a part of it.

Upfront payment terms look like this, for example: "Please find attached the invoice 12345 for our delivery/service. The total amount is £2,000, with an upfront deposit of £200 due by xx/yy/zzzz.

Our bank account details can be found below. Thank you very much"

30 days payment terms
30 days payment terms are often referred to as net 30 on invoices. This means that customers are granted a payment period of 30 calendar days (not working days).

The shortest form on a bill looks like this: "Payment terms: net 30"

Instead of 30 days, you can also give your customers a shorter or longer payment term, for example net 14 or net 60. However, to avoid confusion, we recommend that you emphasise the payment term even more clearly, because some customers do not know what the term net xy means. You can then formulate the payment terms like this:

Payment terms: Payment is due within 30 days of invoice date
Or:
Payment terms: Payment due 15 June, 2022

Discount rates
If you grant your customers a discount for earlier payment, you can also choose a short form, for example:

2/10 net 30: 2% discount when paid within 10 days; later payment: full amount
4/14 net 60: 4% discount when paid within 14 days; later payment: full amount You can also write out the short form:
Payment terms: 2% discount for payments made within 20 days; 30-day due date
Payment terms for immediate payments
Immediate payment is referred to on an invoice as payment due upon receipt. This means that the invoice must be paid immediately upon receipt. Please note, however, that it may still take a few days before the transaction is credited to your account. We therefore recommend that you specify a clear date or deadline instead of immediate payment:

"Payment terms: Payment is due within 7 days of invoice date".

Importance & benefits of a cash flow forecast
The advantages of a cash flow forecast are numerous. The forecast not only provides an overview of the cash flow, but also helps with corporate planning. Especially in economically difficult or uncertain times, it is an important tool.


It is used to anticipate cash flow bottlenecks so that they can be counteracted at an early stage. If you look at why a company had to file for insolvency in retrospect, you often find that cash flow problems were the reason - and often these could even have been avoided with precise cash flow planning.

Why is a cash flow forecast important to startup businesses?
A cash flow forecast is important for all companies, regardless of whether it is a start-up or a company that is already firmly established in the market. But for start-ups, the cash flow forecast has another, special significance: it must convince investors and other lenders.

The cash flow forecast should always be attached to the business plan. The forecast clearly shows what income and expenses the start-up expects in the coming months. If bottlenecks are imminent, it can also be used to determine how much money investors or lenders will have to provide.


Cash flow forecast: Advantages and disadvantages
Advantages of cash flow projection
Anticipate bottlenecks: The biggest advantage of a cash flow forecast is that it can be used to anticipate cash flow shortages. It can therefore help prevent insolvency because, if detected early, managers can take measures to mitigate the effects of the shortage.

For example, a loan can be applied for in time, investments postponed or other assets liquidated to maintain cash flow.

Plan investments better: If you can see in the cash flow forecast that you can expect high surpluses in the coming months, it is easier to plan when to invest. In this way, you can explore in advance how best to invest the surpluses in the company: do you build up reserves, do you invest in the capital market, or do you expand production capacity? All these questions can be answered with the cash flow forecast.

Play through scenarios: With the help of a cash flow forecast, various scenarios can be run through. For example, you can look at how a supply bottleneck will affect future cash flow, or what will happen if customer demand drops rapidly. How long will the cash reserves last then?

In this way, those responsible can explore their room for manoeuvre and come up with a plan B as to what they will do if one of the scenarios occurs.

Better cost control: By looking at monthly expenses in detail on the cash flow forecast, it is easier to see what the company is spending money on. This can prompt those responsible to put individual cost factors to the test. The forecast also enables efficient cost control and helps companies to work at optimal costs in the long run.

Better receivables management: The cash flow forecast can also help with receivables management. For example, if you see that you often have cash flow problems because customers do not pay their invoices on time or because you give them too long a period to pay, you can optimise this too.

Risks of a cash flow forecast
No 100% security: A cash flow forecast is ultimately only an estimate of the future. It is not guaranteed that the revenues and expenses will actually occur as predicted. Depending on how much time is spent on market and customer analysis, the forecast may be closer or less close to reality.

Some things can't be predicted either. We saw this during the Corona crisis, which caught companies completely unprepared. That's why it's good to take precautions with worst-case scenarios so that you know roughly what to expect in the worst case.

Planning difficult in the long term: A cash flow forecast prepared at the beginning of the year for the entire business year will rarely be correct until the end of the year. Relying only on this one-time planning could therefore lead to wrong decisions. Therefore, in addition to long-term cash flow planning, it is better to do short-term planning, e.g. on a monthly or even weekly basis.

Those responsible thus gain more control over the company's cash flow, and then see during the course of the year through a target/actual comparison whether the planned values for the long-term forecast correspond to the actual values.


Summary: Benefits of a cash flow forecast outweigh the risks
The cash flow forecast is indispensable for a company, which is why time and care should be invested in its preparation. The more precise the approach, the greater the advantages of the forecast. If you analyse the market situation in detail and map it in the forecast, you can often identify bottlenecks before they arise.
 

Cashflow Forecasting Best Practice

The COVID-19 pandemic highlighted (often painfully) the importance of strong liquidity risk management practices. With major disruptions in global supply chains, cash management transformed from an important objective to a top priority for treasurers as well as executives overnight.

However, this newfound interest in liquidity is unlikely to wane anytime soon. As Accenture explained in a recent report, the pandemic has “long-lasting implications for how people work and how supply chains function.” And as a result, an effective “long-term, risk response will need to become an integral part of business-as-usual protocols” in order to ensure your organization’s success in future times of crisis.

As most treasurers know, cash flow forecasting is an integral part of their business’s liquidity risk management process. Unfortunately, cash flow forecasting often gets a bad rep due to the amount of time it takes to execute it and the questionable insights it often produces.

To help you improve the reliability of your forecasts and reduce the time required to generate them, we’ve compiled a list of the cash forecasting best practices we recommend adopting.

‍

1. Adopt a Data-Driven Cash Flow Forecasting Process
We’re the first to admit that being “data-driven” is a bit of a cliché in today’s business world. But it’s very difficult to improve liquidity management without using your business’s actual transaction data.

It is important to note, however, that a data-driven forecasting process is not about creating a perfectly accurate report — it’s about leveraging your data to understand your business.

Many treasurers often spend hours (and even days) collecting and manipulating their data in an effort to achieve a perfectly accurate forecast. But the reality is, 100% accuracy is notoriously difficult to achieve and isn’t necessary if a less accurate report would provide the same insights with less work.

So to become more data-driven, focus on finding ways to glean useful insights from your data instead of trying to build the most accurate forecast possible.

If data-driven forecasting is something your business is working towards, we recently recorded a webinar with TMI that goes into greater detail on how to build a data-driven cash flow forecasting process. Watch the replay here to learn which data sources you should use and how to know if your forecasting process is data-driven.

‍

2. Automate Cash Flow Data Collection
Many organizations use spreadsheets to manage their forecasting process. But while spreadsheets are a tool few treasurers could operate without, forecasting automation is better suited to help businesses build a data-driven forecasting process.

First and foremost, since spreadsheet-based forecasting requires you to collect and transform by hand, there is more room for human error. As a result, treasurers often second guess what their forecasts are telling them and need more time to confirm if what they learned was accurate.

However, many businesses we engage who use spreadsheets also tell us they spend 80% of their time simply building their reports. As a result, they have little time to analyze them in order to learn about their business.

Forecasting automation can solve both these problems. Since automation pulls data directly from your ERP or banking systems, it reduces the amount of work required to build a forecast and all but eliminates the opportunity for errors.

As a result, you have more time for analysis and more confidence that what you learn from the analysis is reliable.

For example, Peak Toolworks used our platform to automate their cash flow forecasting process and saved hundreds of hours each year while also improving the reliability of their reports:

“Our process has improved dramatically, and we have a cash forecast complete by the end of the first business day of the week, versus the 4th day, and we are 100% sure of the accuracy.”

— Ben Stilwell, CFO, Peak Toolworks

‍

3. Use a 13-Week Forecasting Period
Generally speaking, the further into the future the forecast looks, the less data there is available to produce a detailed, accurate projection of your cash position. For this reason, most data-driven treasurers use 13-week cash flow forecasts because there’s usually enough data for short-term accuracy and enough future visibility to enable strategic decision-making.

A 13-week forecast is also ideal because:

It provides ideal visibility for assessing liquidity risk. Since there’s usually enough data to provide an accurate view into the weeks ahead, 13-week forecasts help you identify and plan for cash shortages before they become urgent. For example, with a 13-week forecast, you could identify a potential shortage several months before it would occur, providing your treasury team with sufficient time to arrange bank funding or review intercompany lending options.
It helps you manage cash without impacting long-term planning. Longer-term planning such as revenue increases or expense reduction may extend years into the future. Using a 13-week forecast lets you plan for cash requirements on a medium-term basis without impacting those plans. For example, with a 13-week forecast, you plan for debt repayments or short-term investments without impacting annual budgeting.
It’s suitable for banks and investors. Because the 13-week time period typically provides enough data to be accurate, it’s a key measure of good financial control from a bank’s or an investor’s perspective. So, depending on the ownership structure, debts, relationships, or investment status of your company, using a 13-week forecast could help demonstrate your business’s financial health.
To help companies maximize the value of their 13-week cash forecasts, we built a guide that provides an overview of how to set one up from a best practice standpoint — download the guide here.

‍

4. Use a Rolling Forecast
Aberdeen and IBM found that rolling forecasts improve the accuracy of forecasted and budgeted revenue by roughly 14% when compared to the static forecasting and budgeting process many organizations use. More important than accuracy, however, is the fact that rolling forecasts provide businesses with greater agility — something research from McKinsey shows increases financial performance by 20-30% on average.

For example, if product demand suddenly decreases, a static forecast would preclude you from adjusting it to accommodate those changes until the next forecasting period. As a result, you’d have a harder time understanding how lost revenue might affect your ability to pay suppliers.

A rolling forecast, on the other hand, would provide you with a more accurate view of your cash, which would make it easier to optimize the timing of any spending you had planned (or financing you may need to secure to cover your expenses).

Perhaps unsurprisingly, a 2020 survey of financial professionals by the Association of Financial Professionals found that most of those in the survey intend to adopt rolling forecasts in the near future.

For more information on how to build a rolling forecast, we wrote an article explaining the process here.

‍

Real-Time Visibility Empowers Better Decision-Making
As PwC highlighted in their 20/21 Working Capital Study, “real-time bottom-up transparency is necessary” to adequately manage liquidity risks. However, that kind of transparency is extremely time-consuming for most businesses to achieve with spreadsheets due to the multitudes of data they have to collect and manipulate by hand simply to build their forecasts.

As a result, many major research and consulting firms like Accenture and Deloitte now recommend moving away from historical models and moving toward analytics platforms and automation for risk management.

How to Build a Cash Forecasting Model for Your Business
How to Build a Cash Forecasting Model for Your Business
A cash forecasting model is the reporting structure and logic that produces a Cash Flow Forecast. Cash forecasting models are typically built using two dimensions: a business’s cash flow and a specified reporting timeframe.

A well-designed forecasting model helps businesses plan for future cash shortages and surpluses more efficiently. However, a well-designed forecasting model will look different for every organization since the best way to design the model depends on an organization’s unique business objectives.

Below is the process we recommend for designing a cash forecasting model that will provide your organization with the visibility it needs to make effective business decisions with its cash.

1. Determine Your Business Objective
The more you tailor your forecasting model to a specific business objective, the more likely it is that your model will provide useful insights. So the first step in building an effective model is to hone in on the objective you want it to support.

We find that organizations most commonly use cash forecasts for one of the following objectives:

Short-term liquidity planning: Monitoring your business’s cash balance on a day-to-day basis to meet short-term obligations like salaries or vendor payments
Interest and debt reduction: Planning for payments on any loans or debt your organization has taken on
Covenant and key date visibility: Forecasting cash levels on key reporting dates, such as a month, quarter, or year-end
Liquidity risk management: Identifying liquidity shortages that might arise, so you can plan to address them
Growth planning: Managing working capital to fund activities that will help grow the business
It’s worth noting that there is often overlap between a forecasting model that best supports one objective and a model that best supports another. For example, businesses that wish to design a model to support liquidity risk management could also find that model useful for interest and debt reduction.

The extent to which there is an overlap will depend on the next two steps.

2. Choose a Reporting Period
Your reporting period refers to the granularity with which you project cash levels. The most common reporting periods are daily, weekly, and monthly. The best reporting period to choose for your forecasting model will depend on the business objective you selected above and how far into the future you wish to forecast cash flow.

Here are three of the most common reporting periods and the business objectives they’re best suited to support.

Daily Reporting
Daily reporting classifies cash flow data on a daily basis. Daily Cash Forecasting is particularly useful for short-term liquidity management, where companies require a detailed view of cash positions and use a cash forecasting model to manage the day-to-day cash requirements of the business.

The screenshot below shows an example of a daily cash forecasting template, where each column represents a single day and each row details cash inflows and outflows in various categories:

Gaining an accurate view of liquidity levels on a daily basis requires a high level of detail and granularity. So cash flows are often tracked on a customer or supplier basis rather than broader cash classifications, such as trade payments or receipts.

Daily forecasting periods are best for reporting cash flows up to four weeks into the future.

Weekly Reporting
Weekly reporting classifies cash flow predictions on a weekly basis. Weekly reporting periods are particularly useful for companies that are planning for debt repayments, have debt covenants they must uphold from lenders, require reporting date visibility, or are trying to manage future liquidity risks.

The screenshot below shows an example of a weekly cash forecast template, where each column projects cash levels for a different week:



The most regularly used weekly forecasting model is a 13-week Cash Flow Forecast because it provides both a reasonable degree of accuracy and a quarterly view of upcoming cash flows at all times.

Weekly forecasting periods are best for forecasting one to four months into the future.

Monthly Reporting
Monthly reporting classifies cash flow positions on a monthly basis. Monthly forecasting periods are ideal for longer-term planning purposes and are a logical extension of budgeting processes. The screenshot below shows an example of a monthly cash forecast template, with each column containing cash flows for a different month:



Monthly forecasting periods are best for forecasting 12 to 18 months into the future. But they can also be used as part of a mixed period forecast, where the first quarter is reported weekly and subsequent quarters are reported monthly.

3. Choose a Forecasting Method Based on Available Data
Your forecasting method is the data and data collection process you use to populate the cash inflows and outflows in your model. There are two forecasting methods you’ll need to choose between:

Direct forecasting. Uses actual cash flow data from your enterprise resource planning (ERP) systems and bank accounts to populate your model. Direct forecasting is best suited for daily and weekly forecasting periods as access to accurate cash flow data more than 90 days into the future is often limited.
Indirect forecasting. Compares balance sheets between accounts receivable or accounts payable to predict future liquidity levels. Indirect forecasting is best suited for medium to long-term views, as it doesn’t typically provide the kind of detail that short-term reporting often requires.
Generally speaking, direct forecasting is the most accurate method as long as you have access to actual cash flow and can collect it reliably (more on this next).

Use Automation to Improve Your Forecasting Model’s Reliability
Most organizations still manage their cash forecasting models manually in spreadsheets. And while spreadsheets are a fantastic tool that no treasury or finance function could run without, the manual work required to manage your model in a spreadsheet opens the door to errors. This is especially true in larger organizations where multiple stakeholders are involved in the data collection and manipulation process.

Simply put, your forecasting model will only produce reliable insights if the data you use to populate it is accurate. Automating the collection of cash flow data directly from ERP systems or bank accounts can decrease the likelihood of errors that could reduce its reliability, as well as save organizations more than 90% of the manual work it takes to keep their forecasting model(s) up to date.





5 Ways to manage cash flow for your business
Learning to manage cash flow is an elementary building block for your business finances. Many profitable companies turned bankrupt due to a lack of a proper cash flow management strategy. Adequately managing cash flow lets you get a significantly better and more accurate read on the financial position of your business.

The most crucial aspect of managing cash flow is constant monitoring. Complete visibility of the money your company is bringing in and how much of that money you have in hand to use is another vital aspect. When you have an accurate idea of your company’s cash flow cycle, you can work to correct any inconsistencies in it.

Following these essential tips can help you manage your company’s cash flow effectively:

1. Cash flow forecasting
The most important thing you can do to notify yourself of problems before they arise is to make regular and accurate cash flow projections. Good forecasting and estimates using a cash flow forecast method, template or tool will help you to make timely decisions.

It also helps if you constantly review and update it and correct any assumptions you made when creating the forecast. Also, stress-testing your projections from time to time is a must.

See also: How to make a cash flow forecast?

2. Revenue estimation
The next step is to make an accurate assessment of how your sales will go and how much revenue this will bring in (based on the forecast). Also, it would be best to consider the timelines for getting paid for these sales.

Correct revenue estimation is an important part of your cash flow planning and determines how much you will have to pay for key business outlays.

3. Identification of expenses
Next, identify all your payments and expenses (salaries & wages, rent, investment in new assets, etc.). Also, add interest charges and insurance premiums to your expenses.

You must pay attention to the cash flow projection and look at the line item expenses disproportionate to your sales. You can refer to last year’s bank statements as a checklist while predicting new incomings and outgoings. Continually review your company’s overall cost structure to locate efficiency gaps and implementations that can be modified to increase savings.

4. Financial reporting
Ensuring that your financial statements & reports are up to date is crucial. Otherwise, it won’t be a true reflection of your financial standing. You will also need a reasonably accurate view of your opening and closing financial position.

Further, ensure that you keep an eye on your cash flow statement (inflow/outflow), as this shows your viability in the short term and helps you manage your bills.

5. Leveraging technology
Companies lacking practical liquidity monitoring usually cannot perform accurate cash flow forecasts. Embracing technology can enable decision-makers to manage liquidity in a targeted and simple way.

With the right technology and business strategies, you can worry less about cash flow and dedicate more time to running your business. Moreover, using software to create a budget and preview cash flow projections help to streamline your business processes and increase efficiency.

Free Cash Flow (FCF) is one of the indicators most frequently monitored by business people, banks, investors and other analysts. It is important because it measures the financial performance of a business.

But what exactly is Free Cash Flow? What purpose does it serve? How is it calculated? And, above all, what does it mean? Read on for all the answers to these questions, and many more.

Free Cash Flow (FCF) Defined
Free Cash Flow (FCF) corresponds to the amount of money the business generates through its day-to-day operations, and which is truly available after the investments necessary to maintain or develop production have been paid (maintenance, fixed costs, asset development, etc.).

Free Cash Flow is a capital that can be reinvested in the business, or used to pay the company’s different capital providers. Interest can be paid to creditors, the company's debt can be reduced, and shareholders may redeem shares or receive dividends.

Free Cash Flow is one of the Cash Flows you can calculate with your cash flow statement.

Free Cash Flow Explained
Free Cash Flow actually means available cash flow.

Practical Example of Free Cash Flow
To explain the principle of Free Cash Flow (FCF) in practical terms, let’s take the example of a plumbing business.

The company's cash flow will come from its regular income: i.e. services provided and products sold (repairs, equipment, advice, etc.).

At the end of the month, the company manager will use this cash to:

pay the staff;
buy equipment sold or used;
replace damaged tools;
maintain premises and service company vehicles (painting, repairs, etc.);
and obviously pay their own salary.
Once all these payments made, if any money from the past month’s income is left over, it will be what we call Free Cash Flow.



Our plumbing firm can use this capital in different ways:
Invest in the growth of the business, for example by buying out a competitor or purchasing new premises;

Repay a part of the firm’s debts, so that it is less dependent on banks and other creditors, and is owned more by its shareholders (here, the owner of the business);

Pay some or all of this capital to shareholders, as dividends.

What is the purpose of Free Cash Flow (FCF)?
Calculating the Free Cash Flow of your business gives you a real idea of its financial performance and its potential for action. Seizing an investment opportunity can end in disaster if you don’t have an exact picture of its cash position.

This is why Free Cash Flow is an indicator that decision-makers, creditors, investors and business analysts look at so often. Without cash, it will be difficult for the company to develop new offerings, acquire new assets, pay dividends or reduce its debt.

Free Cash Flow is a very precise tool for measuring the financial soundness of a business. If it is properly interpreted, it provides valuable information about the current position and helps make decisions for the future accordingly.

Free Cash Flow (FCF): A more precise indicator than the Balance Sheet
Free Cash Flow and Balance Sheet: What’s the difference?
Free Cash Flow therefore lets you know whether a company generates a positive cash flow: in short, whether it generates value. Obviously, there are a number of tools that can provide this information, starting with the balance sheet. At the end of the accounting year, you simply need to check whether the company’s net result is a profit, to come to the same conclusion as with the FCF.

UK - BP Image - UK Assets and liabilities

Example of a Balance Sheet
But this is not quite true, because the balance sheet and Free Cash Flow do not concern exactly the same data. Balance sheets include both monetary entries (sales, purchases, salaries) and non-monetary items (allowances, depreciation, changes in inventory, etc.).

A more precise indicator than the Balance Sheet
So, the balance sheet entries do not really reflect the money available to the business. The result of the year, for instance, is calculated according to a multitude of accounting standards. And they will often not exactly reflect the money actually generated over a given period.

For instance, when a firm invests, in property for example, this expenditure is spread over the entire duration of the investment. A purchase of $100,000, with an estimated depreciation period of 10 years will mean that the book result only comes down by $10,000 each year for ten years.

Conversely, when a business makes a sale, the entire amount is entered in the accounting results, even if the payment is not yet effective, or payment facilities are granted by suppliers.

All these standards and different periods can make it complicated to calculate the income actually generated using a traditional balance sheet. And this is where Free Cash Flow comes in, with its ability to do the calculation more concretely.

Calculating Free Cash Flow (FCF)
There are several ways to calculate Free Cash Flow, using your balance sheet or your cash flow statement.

In France, the Financial Markets Authority (AMF) encourages groups to use non-standard indicators in their financial disclosures, such as Free Cash Flow, EBITDA, etc., provided that they explain how they are calculated.

Free Cash Flow Calculation via the Cash Flow Statement
If you have a cash flow statement, you can easily obtain your Free Cash Flow data. Here is the basic formula for calculating the Free Cash Flow of a business:

Free Cash Flow (FCF) = Cash Flow from Operating Activities – Cash Flow from Investing Activities

The components are:

Cash Flow from Operating Activities. This is the money coming into and going out of the company for its everyday business: purchases of raw materials or goods, paying wages and sales of finished products, etc.

Cash Flow from Investing Activities. This means all the flows of capital designed to maintain and grow production: buying new machinery or new sites for example.

Corporate Tax.

Free Cash Flow Calculation via the Balance Sheet Items
In this case, you can calculate the FCF in different ways:

Free Cash Flow (FCF) = GOS + disposals of assets – investments +/- Change in WC – tax on profits

Or

Free Cash Flow (FCF) = Gross Operating Surplus (GOS) – Tax on profits – Change in working capital requirement (∆ WCR) + Disposals of Fixed Assets – Investments

Companies use different variations on the FCF calculation:

The self-financing capacity can be used instead of the formula based on Gross Operating Surplus – Corporate Tax. This indicator more specifically measures the cash surplus generated by operations excluding financial expenses;

Some groups exclude intra-group trade receivables and payables to calculate the change in WCR as they are eliminated in the consolidated result, the Free Cash Flow being used to assess financing needs at group level;

Some groups actually only integrate recurring maintenance investments into cash flow from investing activities, which is generally of a small amount. So Free Cash Flow is supposed to always be positive.


Free Cash Flow to Firm and Free Cash Flow to Equity
A distinction must be drawn between two concepts stemming from Free Cash Flow: Free Cash Flow to Firm, which corresponds to the amount available to all the investors, including holders of debt, and Free Cash Flow to Equity, which concerns the Free Cash Flow available solely to shareholders.

Free Cash Flow to Firm (FCFF)
FCFF corresponds to the amount of money available to investors, including holders of debt. The amount of available interest is the amount after tax. In practice, the interest expense must be added to the Free Cash Flow.

FCFF is particularly used to value companies because it provides a good estimate of available cash flows before any leverage effect generated by the company’s financing structure.

It can be calculated in several ways:

** Method 1:** Cash flows from operations + Interest x (1-tax rate) – Capital investments

** Method 2:** Net Profit + Depreciation + Other non-monetary interest + Interest x (1-tax rate) - Capital investments - Investments in working capital.

Free Cash Flow to Equity (FCFE)
For its part, FCFE only remunerates equity contributors: i.e. the shareholders. It also has the particular feature of being net of tax and calculated after deduction of debt servicing and coverage of investment needs and changes in Working Capital Requirement (WCR).

Analysing Free Cash Flow (FCF)
Analysing Free Cash Flow is essential, as it allows you to monitor changes in a company’s financing needs. Within a group, for example, the CFO might consolidate the FCF forecasts of all the entities to find out whether the group will generate or use up cash the following year.

A company’s FCF can be positive or negative over a given period. If the Free Cash Flow is negative, the company’s debt will grow in theory. If it is positive, the company will be able to reduce it.

Positive Free Cash Flow
If the Free Cash Flow generated by the company is positive, this shows that it is capable of generating a cash surplus once it has paid its investment and operating expenses.

Over several accounting years, the year in which the aggregate FCF becomes positive is the return on investment period. This is why a positive FCF, which does not increase the debt and is nearing the ROI point, will be particularly reassuring for an investor.

Negative Free Cash Flow
Despite the connotations of “negative”, a negative FCF is not necessarily as bad thing. Since the FCF is calculated by taking into account the investments made by the company, a negative Free Cash Flow might only be due to substantial investments. These investments, which result in a negative FCF in one year, may be stopped the following year, or even result in a substantial return on investment (ROI): and all these factors will lead to a positive Free Cash Flow.

That’s why it is vital to track and analyse Free Cash Flow over relatively long periods: because you can only assess the company’s real capacity to make money over long periods.

Change in Free Cash Flow (FCF)
Cumulative Free Cash Flow, a very important indicator
As we have already seen: FCF changes over time, and that’s why it is a pertinent metric. When a business first starts up, the Free Cash Flow may be negative as a result of investments, creation of Working Capital (WC), or possibly start-up losses.

As the time at which cumulative FCF becomes positive marks the start of the return on investment, it is vital to anticipate and manage this aspect as much as possible. If the period before generating a return on investment is long, an investor whose assets have a short lifespan will think he has made a bad investment.

Maintaining Free Cash Flow
A business can look for ways to maintain its Free Cash Flow. If the economic performances are disappointing, managing expenditures will be the main action lever.

Naturally, reducing or deferring expenditures can be a wise decision in a difficult year. The company’s finance department must then work with operations to find the right balance: Can investments, recruitments, and other expenditures initially planned be called into question without affecting the operational performance?

In a nutshell
Free Cash Flow is a key indicator of a business’s performance, and must be carefully monitored and analysed. Over time, it is one of the first indications of a return on investment, and by interpreting it correctly, investors, decision-makers and analysts are able to make coherent projections for the company's future, and take decisions accordingly.



By definition, a cash flow statement is a financial statement that depicts the inflows and outflows of cash for a particular period. It provides information about a company's sources and uses of cash, including operating activities (such as revenue and expenses), investing activities (such as buying or selling assets), and financing activities (such as issuing or repurchasing stock or borrowing money).

In any business, a cash flow statement shows the inflow and outflow of cash within an organisation during a particular period, typically a fiscal quarter or year. Analysing cash flow statements help understand how much cash is being generated, where it comes from, and how it is used.

The cash flow statement helps to assess a company's liquidity, solvency, and overall financial health by showing how much cash is generated or used by its various activities. It is an important tool for investors, analysts, and managers to evaluate a company's financial performance and make informed decisions.

New call-to-action
How to know if a cash flow statement is good or bad?
A good cash flow statement demonstrates positive cash flow and positive operating cash flow, in addition to rational investing and financing activities.

Positive cash flow implies that the company earned more money than it spent, while positive operating cash flow indicates that the company's core operations generate money, and prudent investing and financing activities indicate that the company is investing and financing sensibly.

A bad cash flow statement, on the other hand, shows negative cash flow, negative operating cash flow, and reckless investing and financing operations, which can suggest possible concerns with a company's financial health.

It is also important to evaluate the cash flow statement in the context of other financial statements and business factors to get a holistic view of a company's financial health.

The purpose of the statement of cash flows
Liquidity management: Helps companies manage their liquidity by monitoring their cash inflows and outflows. It helps them ensure they have enough cash to fulfil their financial obligations, such as paying suppliers, employees, and lenders.

Financial planning: Helps companies plan their finances effectively. It provides insights into their cash position, enabling them to make informed decisions on investments, expansions, and other financial activities.

Debt management: Helps companies manage their debt by assessing their ability to repay their loans. It provides insights into their ability to generate cash and meet their debt obligations, enabling them to make informed decisions on borrowing and repayment.

Investment decisions: Helps companies make informed decisions on investments. It enables them to assess the potential return on investment and the risk involved, helping them make better investment decisions.

Financial reporting: Essential for financial reporting and provides valuable information on a company's financial performance and liquidity.

What to look for when analysing cash flow statement?
Operating cash flow
The cash generated or used in a business's day-to-day operations. It includes cash inflows from sales revenue and outflows from expenses, such as salaries, rent, bonus payments to contractors and other utilities.

Investing cash flow
This is the cash used for investments, or investing activities such as buying or selling property, plant, and equipment, and investments in other companies.

Financing cash flow
The cash used for financing activities, such as borrowing or repaying loans, issuing or buying back stocks, and paying dividends.

Net cash flow
It is the difference between the cash inflows & outflows over a specific period. A positive net cash flow indicates more cash coming in than going out, while a negative net cash flow suggests more cash going out than coming in.

Changes in cash balance
It reflects the difference between the beginning and ending cash balance over a specific period. It shows the amount of cash generated or used during that period.

How to perform cash flow analysis?
Step 1: Look at the overall net cash flow - Determine the net cash flow for the period (a month, quarter, or year). If it is positive, the company has generated profit (more cash than it used}during the period, and if it is negative, it has used more cash than generated.

Step 2: Analysing cash flows from operating activities - Look for trends and changes in net income, depreciation, and working capital (such as accounts receivable and accounts payable).

Step 3: Analysing cash flows from investing activities - Look for trends and changes in the company's investments in assets such as property, plant, and equipment and the purchase/sale of assets/investments to determine the company's investment activities.

Step 4: Analysing cash flows from financing activities - Look for trends and changes in the company's financing activities, such as issuing bonds or stock, repaying debt, and paying taxes and dividends, to determine the company's financing activities.

Step 5: Calculate free cash flow - Subtract capital expenditures from cash from operating activities to determine the company's free cash flow.

Step 6: Compare to other financial statements - Comparing the cash flow statement to the income statement and balance sheet helps better understand the company's financial health and performance.

Step 7: Interpret cash flow statements for red flags - Look for unusual items or trends that may be strong indicators of financial trouble, such as a significant negative net cash flow or consistently negative free cash flow.

How to analyse a cash flow statement using ratios?
- Operating cash flow
Net income + Non-cash expenses - Changes in working capital

- Free cash flow
Operating cash flow - Capital expenditures

- Cash conversion cycle (CCC)
Days inventory outstanding + Days sales outstanding - Days payables outstanding

- Cash flow margin
Operating cash flow / Total revenue

- Operating cash flow ratio
Operating cash flow / Current liabilities

- Price-to-cash-flow ratio
Stock price / Operating cash flow per share
Cash flow analysis: Example
Following is a cash flow analysis example:

Amount (in €)
Cash flows from operating activities	
Net income	75 000
Depreciation and amortization	20 000
Increase in accounts receivable	(15 000)
Increase in accounts payable	10 000
Cash provided by operating activities	90 000
Cash flows from investing activities	
Purchase of property, plant, and equipment	(50 000)
Sale of investments	15 000
Cash used in investing activities	(35 000)
Cash flows from financing activities	
Issuance of bonds	100 000
Repayment of bank loan	(25 000)
Dividends paid	(20 000)
Cash provided by financing activities	55 000
Net increase in cash and cash equivalents	110 000
Beginning cash and cash equivalents	70 000
Ending cash and cash equivalents	180 000
What does a cash flow statement show?
An analysis of the sections of cash flow statement above gives us the following:

Operating cash flow = €90,000
Investing cash flow = (€35,000)
Financing cash flow = €55,000
Net cash flow = €110,000
Changes in cash balance = €180,000
Vertical analysis of a cash flow statement
Vertical analysis is a financial analysis technique that compares each line item on a financial statement to a base amount to determine the proportion of the total.

The base amount for a cash flow statement is typically the net cash flow from operating activities.

To perform a vertical analysis of a cash flow statement:

Determine the base amount
Calculate the percentage of each line item
Analyse the results
Amount (in €)	% of Net Operating Cash Flow
Cash flows from operating activities		100%
Net income	75 000	83,33%
Depreciation and amortization	20 000	22,22%
Increase in accounts receivable	(15 000)	-16,67%
Increase in accounts payable	10 000	11,11%
Cash provided by operating activities	90 000	100%
Cash flows from investing activities		
Purchase of property, plant and equipment	(50 000)	-55,56%
Sale of investments	15 000	16,67%
Cash used in investing activities	(35 000)	-38,89%
Cash flows from financing activities		
Issuance of bonds	100 000	111,11%
Repayment of bank loan	(25 000)	-27,78%
Dividends paid	(20 000)	-22,22%
Cash provided by financing activities	55 000	61,11%
Net increase in cash and cash equivalents	110 000	122,22%
Beginning cash and cash equivalents	70 000	77,78%
Ending cash and cash equivalents	180 000	200%
(N.B: The vertical analysis helps identify areas where the company generates or uses cash.)

Is it necessary to always have positive cash flow?
A company is not required to have a constant positive cash flow. In fact, a few companies may experience negative cash flow throughout some periods despite maintaining solid financial health.

When a company invests in new projects or assets, pays off debt, or returns capital to shareholders through dividends or stock buybacks, negative cash flow can occur. However, if a company consistently has negative cash flow over an extended period of time, it may indicate potential financial problems.

For example, a long period of negative operating cash flow may suggest that the company's core operations are not generating enough cash to support the business. Negative investing cash flow for an extended period may suggest that the company is not making sound investment decisions.

Negative financing cash flow for an extended period may indicate that the company is struggling to raise capital or pay off debt.




What does the cash flow statement tell an analyst?
The cash flow statement informs financial analysts about a company's cash inflows and outflows during a specific time. It depicts cash sources and uses, such as operating, investing, and financing activities. The cash flow statement can be used by analysts to assess a company's liquidity, solvency, and overall financial health.

Analysts can precisely examine a company's ability to earn cash from core operations, invest in future growth, and pay financial obligations. The cash flow statement can also highlight potential red flags such as negative cash flows, a high degree of investment or financing activity, or significant changes in cash flow patterns.

How does a cash flow analysis help?
Cash flow analysis is a financial analysis technique used to evaluate the inflow and outflow of cash within a business. It aims to determine the company's ability to generate cash, meet its financial obligations, and fund its future growth. It can help identify potential cash flow problems, such as cash shortfalls or excessive spending, and enable business owners and investors to make informed decisions about the organisation's financial management.

Bottom Line
Analysis of cash flow statements can help business owners and investors understand a company's cash position and liquidity, identify potential cash flow problems, and make informed financial decisions.
Understanding cash flow analysis is crucial for managing finances, making informed investment decisions, and ensuring financial stability.
The bottom line is that analysing cash flow statements helps companies ensure they have enough cash to meet their expenses/ financial obligations and enables them to avoid cash problems and achieve their financial goals.



Working capital and cash flow are closely connected. To operate properly, a business must have sufficient available funds to finance its operations: raw materials purchases, trade receivables, etc. This is where working capital comes in, as it is basically your company's “nest egg”!

If you would like to know what working capital is, how to have a healthy working capital, and how to calculate it, read on to learn the basic principles of WC.

Working Capital Defined
Working capital (WC) is an accounting metric that shows, in figures, how a business uses its money. This is a very important concept in terms of cashflow management. In practical terms, this metric represents the funds available to a business to pay its running expenses (suppliers, staff, operating expenses) until it obtains payment from its customers.

Overall Net Working Capital (ONWC)
Also known as overall net working capital (ONWC), working capital is the capital you use to meet your financial obligations on a daily basis.

Having visibility of your working capital allows you to run your business more efficiently because you know in advance what expenses you can cover without resorting to a loan.

In practical terms, keeping an eye on this metric allows you to sustainably finance the investments that your business cannot do without.

Origins of Working Capital
Originally, working capital was used to assess a business's solvency by working out the difference between its most liquid assets (inventories, receivables and cash in hand) and its short-term liabilities or the difference between its long-term funds (equity and borrowings) and its fixed assets. If the difference was positive, the company's financial balance was considered satisfactory.

In the 1970s, theanalysis of financial balance was fine-tuned and to assess it, the amount of working capital calculated was compared with the company's recurring financial requirements generated by its operations. This became known as the working capital requirement (WCR).

What is working capital used for?
Today, this accounting instrument measures the funds a business has in the medium and long term to finance routine operations, outside its turnover. It gives a precise view of the financial health of your business in order to manage it confidently and build your development strategy. To optimise cash flow, this “reserve” must be adapted to the operating cycle of your business at all times. Key takeaway: the working capital must be sufficient to partly cover the working capital requirement (WCR) in order to support and maintain the operating cycle.

Working Capital VS Working Capital Requirement
Although these are two key concepts for a business, they are both interlinked and distinct.

👉 What is Working Capital Requirement (WCR) ?


Working capital requirement is the money a company needs at a given point in time,
whereas working capital is used to determine whether the long-term funds are sufficient to finance the fixed assets (durable assets).
EN - Blogpost image - WR sheet 1 UK

Working capital is linked to the balance sheet whereas working capital requirement relates to the short-term financing of a business.

To fully understand:

Working Capital Requirement: amount the business needs to cover its operating expenses;
Working Capital: amount the business possesses to pay its operating expenses.
When to Calculate your Working Capital
A working capital calculation is needed in three precise situations:

When starting up a business: to define the necessary share capital and the amount of bank loans needed.
At specific times during the existence of a business: before launching new products, to anticipate the opening of a sales outlet, before a recruitment phase, etc.
When selling a business: in this context, the working capital not only provides proof of financial strength but also helps to estimate the most coherent sale price.
Working Capital Formulas
Working capital is calculated based on the information found in the balance sheet. The balance sheet lists the assets and liabilities of your business.

EN - Blogpost Image - UK wr 2

In the example above, it is split into two parts: top and bottom. The top of the balance sheet is the part containing all of a company's long-term items (available for more than one year), whether assets or liabilities. It precisely sets out the investment capital and long-term uses.

Calculating working capital using long-term balance sheet items
The two calculation methods below are based on what is referred to in France as the top of the balance sheet.

Calculation method 1: Overall net working capital (ONWC) = equity - fixed assets

However, on a day-to-day basis, a different formula is more often applied:

Calculation method 2: Overall net working capital (ONWC) = investment capital - long-term uses

In this formula, the investment capital includes:

equity,
financial debts,
depreciation,
provisions for contingencies and charges.
And long-term uses correspond to gross fixed assets. Calculating working capital using current assets and liabilities This formula is based on the current assets and liabilities in the balance sheet. Unlike the equation above, it measures it in the short term (less than a year).

Overall net working capital (ONWC) = short-term assets - short-term liabilities

Short-term assets include:

current assets
cash in hand
Short-term liabilities include:

current liabilities
short-term debts
Why a company director should focus on the long term

Even though it might seem less urgent to monitor these long-term items, as a company director or CFO, you should not overlook them. Because having a regular analysis allows you to optimise your cash flow, develop or diversify your business and even reduce your debt.

Composition of working capital
Overall net working capital (ONWC) breaks down into three main categories.

1/ Equity or capital funds
Capital funds represent the business's own resources. They come from the profits made by the business itself or inputs from investors. These available financial resources help support the investments and operating cycle of a business. The more capital funds a business has, the more its value is boosted.

If capital funds are positive: the business has financial reserves to make long-term investments such as: machinery, but also to finance the business activity: expenditure on goods, book credit, etc.
If equity is negative: this means that its value is zero or even negative and implies that the business has made a loss in previous years. In this context, the business must build its equity back up. Juridiquement (article L. 223-42 du Code de Commerce), vous disposez de 2 ans pour reconstituer votre capital en cas de pertes.
2/ Medium and long-term loan capital
Loan capital represents the amounts granted by a financial institution in the form of instalment loans. In fact, it often corresponds to borrowings and toshareholders' loans that are blocked over the medium or long term.

3/ Fixed Assets
Fixed assets, which can also be called long-term assets, mean those of the company's assets that are intended to be retained over the long term.

Fixed assets break down into three categories: intangible, tangible (property, plant and equipment) and financial (permanent investments.

Property, Plant and Equipment Once they are completed, they are entered in the balance sheet under the following line items:

land, including fixtures and improvements;
buildings: general facilities, structures and infrastructure;
technical facilities, equipment and machinery.
Until they are completed, property, plant and equipment are entered in a work-in-progress item.

Intangible fixed assets include:

preliminary expenses;
research and development costs;
concessions, patents, licences, trademarks and software; they represent the investments in intangibles made by the business;
The goodwill consists of intangible items, including lease rights.
Permanent Investments

Equity interests such as shares for example;
Loans granted to staff or shareholders;
Debt securities;
Deposits and guarantees.
Example of working capital calculation
The company Smith & Jones has the following accounting data for 2020: 150,000 Euros equity 300,000 Euros of fixed assets

Here is the formula for calculating the working capital:

150,000 - 300,000 = - €150,000 ONWC

Financial Analysis: Here, we therefore have a negative ONWC. The funds available to Smith & Jones will not be sufficient to cover the operating expenses.

There are two possible solutions: find new financing or review the company's strategy.

Working Capital Analysis
There are three possibilities with working capital: depending on the result, it may be above zero, below zero or equal to zero.

Positive Working Capital
When the net working capital is positive, this means that the business generates a cash surplus, which allows it to finance all or part of the structural portion of its working capital requirement (WCR). When it is calculated over the long term, a positive WC proves that the business has stable resources.

Conversely, when a positive working capital is calculated over the short term, it means that debts can be paid by realising short-term assets.

Negative Working Capital
When a business has a negative working capital, it is described as undercapitalised. This is a risky situation, as the business is unable to bear all of its investments. If the working capital is negative over the long term, this implies that the resources will not be sufficient for the business to operate correctly. If the working capital is negative in the short term, then the business is unable to pay its debts, even if it realises its assets.

Zero Working Capital
Zero ONWC means that the business has no long-term cash advance and this undermines its financial balance by making it insecure.

Working Capital and Net Cash
Net cash encompasses all liquid assets that are available in the short term; in accounting jargon, this is known as the “sight balance”. Link between net cash and working capital Net cash corresponds to the cash assets of a business less the financing of working capital (ONWC) and working capital requirement (WCR).

Calculating Net Cash
Net cash is calculated using the following subtraction:

Net cash = working capital - working capital requirement or ONWC - WCR

This formula is the most frequently used; it corresponds to the approach by long-term assets and liabilities.

Net cash is calculated either: Before taking over or founding a business By calculating net cash when developing a business plan, the viability of a project can be checked for example.

Or during the life cycle of a business As CFO or Company Director, you may wish to track this management metric on a daily, weekly or monthly basis.

By carefully monitoring your net cash:

you measure your short-term financial balance;
you guarantee efficient and sustainable management;
you have visibility over your future investments;
you have a reference to develop your budget forecast.
Drop in Working Capital: the most frequent causes
There are several reasons why a business may experience areduction in working capital. The most common are:

Loss of turnover
When a business loses a significant part of its turnover, this directly impacts its equity, in other words its cash flow and, therefore, its liquid assets.

This mechanism inevitably entails a reduction in working capital, with a decline in cash flow.

This loss of turnover may be temporary and due to a one-off event. If this is the case, the situation can be turned around by adopting a different strategy, revising the pricing policy, diversifying the products or services or targeting new customers for example. In general, to turn a business's financial situation around, a loan needs to be taken out over three to five years to reinforce the capital funds.

Self-Financing
Two means of financing are available to a business:

either by using external funds: borrowing, raising capital, etc.
or by using its capital funds, which is known as self-financing.
Businesses sometimes self-finance their investments to avoid resorting to a loan. This is a tricky choice as it can weaken a healthy cash position and reduce the working capital.

By opting for this solution, you increase your long-term needs without offsetting your investment capital. Generally, it is therefore wiser to finance an investment by means of a capital increase or a bank loan.

Dividend Distribution
By definition, dividends correspond to the profits generated by a business. These earnings are levied directly from the company's profits to be paid to shareholders: this is known as dividend distribution.

This distribution impacts the cash position, as it entails a disbursement and reduces the company's equity. The cash actually available should therefore be taken into account to optimise the dividend distribution.

In other words, if you pay less than the profit you increase the working capital; otherwise, you delve into your reserve funds.

In order to anticipate these variations, it is highly recommended to make a cash flow forecast.






What is the value of receivables in cash flow management?
Dr. Nirmalarajah Asokan
Dr. Nirmalarajah Asokan
03 Nov 2022 - updated on 23 Jan 2025
Reading time: 5 min.
Table of content

Receivables in business: Definition
Receivables in accounting & how to use them
Account receivable formulas
Account receivable example
Why are cash and receivables so important for a company?
What is a good value for accounts receivables days?

Receivables or account receivables refer to the amount of money due to a company for the provision of services.
Receivables are part of the assets of a company. They count as liquidity and are therefore particularly important for financing the operative business. Here we show you exactly what they are and how they can be used to calculate important key figures.

Receivables in business: Definition
Receivables or account receivables refer to the amount of money due to a company for the provision of services. These are open invoices that the company's customers have to pay because they have used a service.


Are receivables debit or credit?
Accounts receivable are recorded on the balance sheet as an asset, as they represent a part of the company's assets. They can be considered as loans that the company has made and will be repaid at a certain point in time.

New call-to-action
Payables and receivables: The difference
Accounts receivables are offset by accounts payables. These belong to the liabilities and are also shown as such on the balance sheet. Accounts payables are the open invoices that a company still has to settle with its business partners because it has used a service.

What are accounts payables for one party are accounts receivables for the other party - and vice versa.

Receivables in accounting & how to use them
Receivables are recorded in accounting so that you can see at a glance how high the receivables are. At the end of the business year, the accounts receivable are added up and recorded in the balance sheet. The total then represents the total amount that the customers or business partners still owe the company.

Accounts receivable are counted as liquid assets of a company because they have a short maturity (because invoices are usually settled within a few weeks or months). If the company receives payment when a customer settles his invoice, a positive cash flow is generated in the direction of the company. The related account receivable is then closed.

Accounts receivable show part of the company's liquidity. With the help of key figures, the receivables can also be evaluated and analysed. This subsequently gives the company the opportunity to optimise its liquidity.

Account receivable formulas
With the help of account receivables, important insights into the financial structure of a company can be gained. Several key figures are calculated for this purpose.

Accounts receivable turnover ratio
The accounts receivable turnover ratio indicates the efficiency with which a company can convert its accounts receivable into cash:

Accounts receivable turnover ratio = Net credit sales / average accounts receivables

Net credit sales and average accounts receivable are shown in the balance sheet. They therefore refer to the period of one year.

With this you can now calculate the turnover in days:

Accounts receivable turnover in days = 365 / accounts receivable turnover ratio

Days sales outstanding
The above formulas can also be written differently to obtain the days sales outstanding (DSO):

Days sales outstanding = Average accounts receivables / Net credit sales x 365

Account receivable example
Within one business year, one company had a turnover in the amount of At the beginning of the financial year the accounts receivable from the previous period amounted to £20,000. At the end of the financial year they amount to £10,000.

Let us now analyse these key figures.

First we calculate the average accounts receivable and net credit sales:

Average accounts receivables = (£20,000 + £10,000) / 2 = £15,000 Net credit sales = £100,000 - £20,000 = £80,000

Now we can calculate the accounts receivable turnover ratio: Accounts receivable turnover ratio = £80,000 / £15,000 = 5.33

Based on the days of the year: Accounts receivable turnover in days = 365 / 5.33 = 68.48

On average, the company waits 68.48 days until customers pay their bills. The days sales outstanding also indicate the same:

Days sales outstanding = £15,000 / £80,000 x 365 = 68.44

Why are cash and receivables so important for a company?
Accounts receivable are a part of the liquidity that is converted into cash in the short term. They thus contribute to financing the operative business. In this context, it is important that the revenues flow into the company as quickly as possible. This means that customers should pay their invoices as early as possible.

By analysing days sales outstanding, you get an idea of how long it takes on average for customers to pay their bills. The lower the days sales outstanding, the better for the company, because the revenue is available as cash more quickly.


If the value for days sales outstanding is very high, cash shortages can occur. In this case, the company should take measures to reduce the days sales outstanding. One simple way to do this is to shorten payment terms.

What is a good value for accounts receivables days?
The value a company should aim for for accounts receivable days or days sales outstanding depends strongly on the industry. In e-commerce, values are usually less than 30 days, while in the industrial sector they can be 60 days or more.

If a company wants to assess whether its accounts receivables days are too high, it should compare itself with other companies in the sector. This will give them a good idea of what is a common value in their industry and whether their own value is above or below the industry average.